book/src/super-sql/functions/generics/map.md, before:

### Function

&emsp; **map** &mdash; apply a function to each element of an array or set

### Synopsis

```
map(v: array|set, f: function) -> array|set|error
```

### Description

The `map` function applies function `f`, referenced as an identifier
of the name of the function,
to every element in array or set `v` and
returns an array or set of the results. Function `f` must be a function that takes
only one argument. `f` may be a [user-defined function](../../statements.md#func-statements).

### Examples

---

Upper case each element of an array:
```mdtest-spq
# spq
values map(this, upper)
# input
["foo","bar","baz"]
# expected output
["FOO","BAR","BAZ"]
```

---

Using a user-defined function to convert epoch floats to time values:
```mdtest-spq {data-layout="stacked"}
# spq
fn floatToTime(x): (
  cast(x*1000000000, <time>)
)
values map(this, floatToTime)
# input
[1697151533.41415,1697151540.716529]
# expected output
[2023-10-12T22:58:53.414149888Z,2023-10-12T22:59:00.716528896Z]
```

Commit message:

add lambdas and function references (#6217)
This commit adds lambdas and function references to SuperSQL.
Lambdas are not first class as they cannot be referenced in
generic functions but they are callable and they are passable
to user operators and the map function.

We updated the docs for the map() function to explain lambdas
and function references but more comprehensive updates are
forthcoming from the book branch.

The way the function code is structured now does not easily allow
for passing lambdas to functions so this is not currently supported.
This can change if we update the model to look more like the
operator calling conventions where we could resolve and expand
lambas at compile time within function bodies, but this will be
deferred for now.

book/src/super-sql/functions/generics/map.md, after:

### Function

&emsp; **map** &mdash; apply a function to each element of an array or set

### Synopsis

```
map(v: array|set, f: function) -> array|set|error
```

### Description

The `map` function applies a single-argument function `f`,
in the form of an existing function or a lambda expression,
to every element in array or set `v` and
returns an array or set of the results.

The function `f` references an existing function
with the `&` syntax as in
```
&<name>
```
where `<name>` is an identifier referring to either a built-in function
or a [user-defined function](../../statements.md#func-statements).
Alternatively, `f` may be a lambda expression of the form
```
lambda x: <expr>
```
where `<expr>` is any expression depending only on the lambda argument.

### Examples

---

Upper case each element of an array:
```mdtest-spq
# spq
values map(this, &upper)
# input
["foo","bar","baz"]
# expected output
["FOO","BAR","BAZ"]
```

---

Using a user-defined function to convert epoch floats to time values:
```mdtest-spq {data-layout="stacked"}
# spq
fn floatToTime(x): (
  cast(x*1000000000, <time>)
)
values map(this, &floatToTime)
# input
[1697151533.41415,1697151540.716529]
# expected output
[2023-10-12T22:58:53.414149888Z,2023-10-12T22:59:00.716528896Z]
```

---
_Same as above but with a lambda expression_

```mdtest-spq {data-layout="stacked"}
# spq
values map(this, lambda x:cast(x*1000000000, <time>))
# input
[1697151533.41415,1697151540.716529]
# expected output
[2023-10-12T22:58:53.414149888Z,2023-10-12T22:59:00.716528896Z]
```
