docs/language/operators/aggregate.md, before:

### Operator

&emsp; **aggregate** &mdash; perform aggregations

### Synopsis

```
[aggregate] [<field>:=]<agg>
[aggregate] [<field>:=]<agg> [where <expr>][, [<field>:=]<agg> [where <expr>] ...]
[aggregate] [<field>:=]<agg> [by [<field>][:=<expr>][, [<field>][:=<expr>]] ...]
[aggregate] [<field>:=]<agg> [where <expr>][, [<field>:=]<agg> [where <expr>] ...] [by [<field>][:=<expr>][, [<field>][:=<expr>]] ...]
[aggregate] by [<field>][:=<expr>][, [<field>][:=<expr>] ...]
```
### Description

In the first four forms, the `aggregate` operator consumes all of its input,
applies an [aggregate function](../aggregates/_index.md) to each input value
optionally filtered by a `where` clause and/or organized with the grouping
keys specified after the `by` keyword, and at the end of input produces one
or more aggregations for each unique set of grouping key values.

In the final form, `aggregate` consumes all of its input, then outputs each
unique combination of values of the grouping keys specified after the `by`
keyword.

The `aggregate` keyword is optional since it is an
[implied operator](../pipeline-model.md#implied-operators).

Each aggregate function may be optionally followed by a `where` clause, which
applies a Boolean expression that indicates, for each input value,
whether to deliver it to that aggregate. (`where` clauses are analogous
to the [`where` operator](where.md).)

The output field names for each aggregate and each key are optional.  If omitted,
a field name is inferred from each right-hand side, e.g, the output field for the
[`count` aggregate function](../aggregates/count.md) is simply `count`.

A key may be either an expression or a field.  If the key field is omitted,
it is inferred from the expression, e.g., the field name for `by lower(s)`
is `lower`.

When the result of `aggregate` is a single value (e.g., a single aggregate
function without grouping keys) and there is no field name specified, then
the output is that single value rather than a single-field record
containing that value.

If the cardinality of grouping keys causes the memory footprint to exceed
a limit, then each aggregate's partial results are spilled to temporary storage
and the results merged into final results using an external merge sort.
The same mechanism that spills to storage can also spill across the network
to a cluster of workers in an adaptive shuffle, though this is not yet implemented.

### Examples

Average the input sequence:
```mdtest-spq
# spq
aggregate avg(this)
# input
1
2
3
4
# expected output
2.5
```

To format the output of a single-valued aggregation into a record, simply specify
an explicit field for the output:
```mdtest-spq
# spq
aggregate mean:=avg(this)
# input
1
2
3
4
# expected output
{mean:2.5}
```

When multiple aggregate functions are specified, even without explicit field names,
a record result is generated with field names implied by the functions:
```mdtest-spq
# spq
aggregate avg(this),sum(this),count()
# input
1
2
3
4
# expected output
{avg:2.5,sum:10,count:4(uint64)}
```

Sum the input sequence, leaving out the `aggregate` keyword:
```mdtest-spq
# spq
sum(this)
# input
1
2
3
4
# expected output
10
```

Create integer sets by key and sort the output to get a deterministic order:
```mdtest-spq
# spq
set:=union(v) by key:=k | sort
# input
{k:"foo",v:1}
{k:"bar",v:2}
{k:"foo",v:3}
{k:"baz",v:4}
# expected output
{key:"bar",set:|[2]|}
{key:"baz",set:|[4]|}
{key:"foo",set:|[1,3]|}
```

Use a `where` clause:
```mdtest-spq
# spq
set:=union(v) where v > 1 by key:=k | sort
# input
{k:"foo",v:1}
{k:"bar",v:2}
{k:"foo",v:3}
{k:"baz",v:4}
# expected output
{key:"bar",set:|[2]|}
{key:"baz",set:|[4]|}
{key:"foo",set:|[3]|}
```

Use separate `where` clauses on each aggregate function:
```mdtest-spq
# spq
set:=union(v) where v > 1,
     array:=collect(v) where k=="foo"
     by key:=k
| sort
# input
{k:"foo",v:1}
{k:"bar",v:2}
{k:"foo",v:3}
{k:"baz",v:4}
# expected output
{key:"bar",set:|[2]|,array:null}
{key:"baz",set:|[4]|,array:null}
{key:"foo",set:|[3]|,array:[1,3]}
```

Results are included for `by` groupings that generate null results when `where`
clauses are used inside `aggregate`:
```mdtest-spq
# spq
sum(v) where k=="bar" by key:=k | sort
# input
{k:"foo",v:1}
{k:"bar",v:2}
{k:"foo",v:3}
{k:"baz",v:4}
# expected output
{key:"bar",sum:2}
{key:"baz",sum:null}
{key:"foo",sum:null}
```

To avoid null results for `by` groupings as just shown, filter before `aggregate`:
```mdtest-spq
# spq
k=="bar" | sum(v) by key:=k | sort
# input
{k:"foo",v:1}
{k:"bar",v:2}
{k:"foo",v:3}
{k:"baz",v:4}
# expected output
{key:"bar",sum:2}
```

Output just the unique key values:
```mdtest-spq
# spq
by k | sort
# input
{k:"foo",v:1}
{k:"bar",v:2}
{k:"foo",v:3}
{k:"baz",v:4}
# expected output
{k:"bar"}
{k:"baz"}
{k:"foo"}
```

Commit message:

Add a deprecation note about "summarize" (#5751)

docs/language/operators/aggregate.md, after:

### Operator

&emsp; **aggregate** &mdash; perform aggregations

### Synopsis

```
[aggregate] [<field>:=]<agg>
[aggregate] [<field>:=]<agg> [where <expr>][, [<field>:=]<agg> [where <expr>] ...]
[aggregate] [<field>:=]<agg> [by [<field>][:=<expr>][, [<field>][:=<expr>]] ...]
[aggregate] [<field>:=]<agg> [where <expr>][, [<field>:=]<agg> [where <expr>] ...] [by [<field>][:=<expr>][, [<field>][:=<expr>]] ...]
[aggregate] by [<field>][:=<expr>][, [<field>][:=<expr>] ...]
```

{{% tip "Note" %}}

The operator name `summarize` that was used previously for performing
aggregations is now is deprecated and will be removed from the language in the
future.

{{% /tip %}}

### Description

In the first four forms, the `aggregate` operator consumes all of its input,
applies an [aggregate function](../aggregates/_index.md) to each input value
optionally filtered by a `where` clause and/or organized with the grouping
keys specified after the `by` keyword, and at the end of input produces one
or more aggregations for each unique set of grouping key values.

In the final form, `aggregate` consumes all of its input, then outputs each
unique combination of values of the grouping keys specified after the `by`
keyword.

The `aggregate` keyword is optional since it is an
[implied operator](../pipeline-model.md#implied-operators).

Each aggregate function may be optionally followed by a `where` clause, which
applies a Boolean expression that indicates, for each input value,
whether to deliver it to that aggregate. (`where` clauses are analogous
to the [`where` operator](where.md).)

The output field names for each aggregate and each key are optional.  If omitted,
a field name is inferred from each right-hand side, e.g., the output field for the
[`count` aggregate function](../aggregates/count.md) is simply `count`.

A key may be either an expression or a field.  If the key field is omitted,
it is inferred from the expression, e.g., the field name for `by lower(s)`
is `lower`.

When the result of `aggregate` is a single value (e.g., a single aggregate
function without grouping keys) and there is no field name specified, then
the output is that single value rather than a single-field record
containing that value.

If the cardinality of grouping keys causes the memory footprint to exceed
a limit, then each aggregate's partial results are spilled to temporary storage
and the results merged into final results using an external merge sort.
The same mechanism that spills to storage can also spill across the network
to a cluster of workers in an adaptive shuffle, though this is not yet implemented.

### Examples

Average the input sequence:
```mdtest-spq
# spq
aggregate avg(this)
# input
1
2
3
4
# expected output
2.5
```

To format the output of a single-valued aggregation into a record, simply specify
an explicit field for the output:
```mdtest-spq
# spq
aggregate mean:=avg(this)
# input
1
2
3
4
# expected output
{mean:2.5}
```

When multiple aggregate functions are specified, even without explicit field names,
a record result is generated with field names implied by the functions:
```mdtest-spq
# spq
aggregate avg(this),sum(this),count()
# input
1
2
3
4
# expected output
{avg:2.5,sum:10,count:4(uint64)}
```

Sum the input sequence, leaving out the `aggregate` keyword:
```mdtest-spq
# spq
sum(this)
# input
1
2
3
4
# expected output
10
```

Create integer sets by key and sort the output to get a deterministic order:
```mdtest-spq
# spq
set:=union(v) by key:=k | sort
# input
{k:"foo",v:1}
{k:"bar",v:2}
{k:"foo",v:3}
{k:"baz",v:4}
# expected output
{key:"bar",set:|[2]|}
{key:"baz",set:|[4]|}
{key:"foo",set:|[1,3]|}
```

Use a `where` clause:
```mdtest-spq
# spq
set:=union(v) where v > 1 by key:=k | sort
# input
{k:"foo",v:1}
{k:"bar",v:2}
{k:"foo",v:3}
{k:"baz",v:4}
# expected output
{key:"bar",set:|[2]|}
{key:"baz",set:|[4]|}
{key:"foo",set:|[3]|}
```

Use separate `where` clauses on each aggregate function:
```mdtest-spq
# spq
set:=union(v) where v > 1,
     array:=collect(v) where k=="foo"
     by key:=k
| sort
# input
{k:"foo",v:1}
{k:"bar",v:2}
{k:"foo",v:3}
{k:"baz",v:4}
# expected output
{key:"bar",set:|[2]|,array:null}
{key:"baz",set:|[4]|,array:null}
{key:"foo",set:|[3]|,array:[1,3]}
```

Results are included for `by` groupings that generate null results when `where`
clauses are used inside `aggregate`:
```mdtest-spq
# spq
sum(v) where k=="bar" by key:=k | sort
# input
{k:"foo",v:1}
{k:"bar",v:2}
{k:"foo",v:3}
{k:"baz",v:4}
# expected output
{key:"bar",sum:2}
{key:"baz",sum:null}
{key:"foo",sum:null}
```

To avoid null results for `by` groupings as just shown, filter before `aggregate`:
```mdtest-spq
# spq
k=="bar" | sum(v) by key:=k | sort
# input
{k:"foo",v:1}
{k:"bar",v:2}
{k:"foo",v:3}
{k:"baz",v:4}
# expected output
{key:"bar",sum:2}
```

Output just the unique key values:
```mdtest-spq
# spq
by k | sort
# input
{k:"foo",v:1}
{k:"bar",v:2}
{k:"foo",v:3}
{k:"baz",v:4}
# expected output
{k:"bar"}
{k:"baz"}
{k:"foo"}
```
