docs/install.md, before:

---
title: Installation
---

Several options for installing `super` are available:
* [Homebrew](#homebrew) for Mac or Linux,
* [Binary download](#binary-download), or
* [Build from source](#building-from-source).

To install the SuperDB Python client, see the
[Python library documentation](libraries/python.md).

## Homebrew

On macOS and Linux, you can use [Homebrew](https://brew.sh/) to install `super`:

```bash
brew install brimdata/tap/super
```

Once installed, run a [quick test](#quick-tests).

## Binary Download

We offer pre-built binaries for macOS, Windows and Linux for both amd64/x86 and arm
architectures in the super [GitHub Release page](https://github.com/brimdata/super/releases).

Once the `super` binary is unpacked from a downloaded package, run a [quick test](#quick-tests).

## Building From Source

If you have Go installed, you can easily build `super` from source:

```bash
go install github.com/brimdata/super/cmd/super@latest
```

This installs the `super` binary in your `$GOPATH/bin`.

Once installed, run a [quick test](#quick-tests).

{{% tip "Note" %}}

If you don't have Go installed, download and install it from the
[Go install page](https://golang.org/doc/install). Go 1.23 or later is
required.

{{% /tip %}}

## Quick Tests

`super` is easy to test as it's a completely self-contained
command-line tool and requires no external dependencies.

### Test `super`

To test `super`, simply run this command in your shell:
```mdtest-command
echo '"hello, world"' | super -z -
```
which should produce
```mdtest-output
"hello, world"
```

### Test `super db`

To test `super db`, we'll make a SuperDB data lake in `./scratch`, load data, and query it
as follows:
```
export SUPER_DB_LAKE=./scratch
super db init
super db create Demo
echo '{s:"hello, world"}' | super db load -use Demo -
super db query "from Demo"
```
which should display
```
{s:"hello, world"}
```
Alternatively, you can run a lake service, load it with data using `super db load`,
and hit the API.

In one shell, run the server:
```
super db init -lake scratch
super db serve -lake scratch
```
And in another shell, run the client:
```
super db create Demo
super db use Demo
echo '{s:"hello, world"}' | super db load -
super db query "from Demo"
```
which should also display
```
{s:"hello, world"}
```

Commit message:

Set expectations in README and first docs pages (#5665)

docs/install.md, after:

---
title: Installation
---

Because SuperDB is still under construction, GA releases are not yet available.
However, you can install a build of the [`super`](https://superdb.org/docs/commands/super)
command-line tool based on code that's under active development to start
tinkering.

Multiple options for installing `super` are available:
* [Homebrew](#homebrew) for Mac or Linux,
* [Build from source](#building-from-source).

To install the SuperDB Python client, see the
[Python library documentation](libraries/python.md).

{{% tip "Note" %}}

Once you've installed `super` we recommend focusing first on the functionality
shown in the [`super` command doc](commands/super.md). Feel free to explore
other docs and try things out, but please don't be shocked if you hit
speedbumps in the near term, particularly in areas like performance and full
SQL coverage. We're working on it! 😉

Once you've tried it out, we'd love to hear your feedback via
our [community Slack](https://www.brimdata.io/join-slack/).

{{% /tip %}}

## Homebrew

On macOS and Linux, you can use [Homebrew](https://brew.sh/) to install `super`:

```bash
brew install brimdata/tap/super
```

Once installed, run a [quick test](#quick-tests).

## Building From Source

If you have Go installed, you can easily build `super` from source:

```bash
go install github.com/brimdata/super/cmd/super@main
```

This installs the `super` binary in your `$GOPATH/bin`.

Once installed, run a [quick test](#quick-tests).

{{% tip "Note" %}}

If you don't have Go installed, download and install it from the
[Go install page](https://golang.org/doc/install). Go 1.23 or later is
required.

{{% /tip %}}

## Quick Tests

`super` is easy to test as it's a completely self-contained
command-line tool and requires no external dependencies.

### Test `super`

To test `super`, simply run this command in your shell:
```mdtest-command
echo '"hello, world"' | super -z -
```
which should produce
```mdtest-output
"hello, world"
```

### Test `super db`

To test `super db`, we'll make a SuperDB data lake in `./scratch`, load data, and query it
as follows:
```
export SUPER_DB_LAKE=./scratch
super db init
super db create Demo
echo '{s:"hello, world"}' | super db load -use Demo -
super db query "from Demo"
```
which should display
```
{s:"hello, world"}
```
Alternatively, you can run a lake service, load it with data using `super db load`,
and hit the API.

In one shell, run the server:
```
super db init -lake scratch
super db serve -lake scratch
```
And in another shell, run the client:
```
super db create Demo
super db use Demo
echo '{s:"hello, world"}' | super db load -
super db query "from Demo"
```
which should also display
```
{s:"hello, world"}
```
