docs/language/lateral-subqueries.md, before:

---
weight: 7
title: Lateral Subqueries
---

Lateral subqueries provide a powerful means to apply a Zed query
to each subsequence of values generated from an outer sequence of values.
The inner query may be _any_ pipeline operator sequence (excluding
[`from` operators](operators/from.md)) and may refer to values from
the outer sequence.

{{% tip "Note" %}}

This pattern rhymes with the SQL pattern of a "lateral
join", which runs a subquery for each row of the outer query's results.

{{% /tip %}}

Lateral subqueries are created using the scoped form of the
[`over` operator](operators/over.md). They may be nested to arbitrary depth
and accesses to variables in parent lateral query bodies follows lexical
scoping.

For example,
```mdtest-spq
# spq
over a with name=s into (
  yield {name,elem:this}
)
# input
{s:"foo",a:[1,2]}
{s:"bar",a:[3]}
# expected output
{name:"foo",elem:1}
{name:"foo",elem:2}
{name:"bar",elem:3}
```

Here the [lateral scope](#lateral-scope), described below, creates a subquery
```
yield {name,elem:this}
```
for each subsequence of values derived from each outer input value.
In the example above, there are two input values:
```
{s:"foo",a:[1,2]}
{s:"bar",a:[3]}
```
which imply two subqueries derived from the `over` operator traversing `a`.
The first subquery thus operates on the input values `1, 2` with the variable
`name` set to "foo" assigning `1` and then `2` to `this`, thereby emitting
```
{name:"foo",elem:1}
{name:"foo",elem:2}
```
and the second subquery operates on the input value `3` with the variable
`name` set to "bar", emitting
```
{name:"bar",elem:3}
```

You can also import a parent-scope field reference into the inner scope by
simply referring to its name without assignment, e.g.,
```mdtest-spq
# spq
over a with s into (
  yield {s,elem:this}
)
# input
{s:"foo",a:[1,2]}
{s:"bar",a:[3]}
# expected output
{s:"foo",elem:1}
{s:"foo",elem:2}
{s:"bar",elem:3}
```

## Lateral Scope

A lateral scope has the form `=> ( <query> )` and currently appears
only the context of an [`over` operator](operators/over.md),
as illustrated above, and has the form:
```
over ... with <elem> [, <elem> ...] into ( <query> )
```
where `<elem>` has either an assignment form
```
<var>=<expr>
```
or a field reference form
```
<field>
```
For each input value to the outer scope, the assignment form creates a binding
between each `<expr>` evaluated in the outer scope and each `<var>`, which
represents a new symbol in the inner scope of the `<query>`.
In the field reference form, a single identifier `<field>` refers to a field
in the parent scope and makes that field's value available in the lateral scope
via the same name.

Note that any such variable definitions override [implied field references](pipeline-model.md#implied-field-references) of
`this`. If a both a field named `x` and a variable named `x` need be
referenced in the lateral scope, the field reference should be qualified as
`this.x` while the variable is referenced simply as `x`.

The `<query>` is evaluated once per outer value
on the sequence generated by the `over` expression.  In the lateral scope,
the value `this` refers to the inner sequence generated from the `over` expressions.
This query runs to completion for each inner sequence and emits
each subquery result as each inner sequence traversal completes.

This structure is powerful because _any_ pipeline operator sequence (excluding
[`from` operators](operators/from.md)) can appear in the body of
the lateral scope.  In contrast to the [`yield`](operators/yield.md) example above, a [`sort`](operators/sort.md) could be
applied to each subsequence in the subquery, where `sort`
reads all values of the subsequence, sorts them, emits them, then
repeats the process for the next subsequence.  For example,
```mdtest-spq
# spq
over this into (
  sort this | collect(this)
)
# input
[3,2,1]
[4,1,7]
[1,2,3]
# expected output
[1,2,3]
[1,4,7]
[1,2,3]
```

## Lateral Expressions

Lateral subqueries can also appear in expression context using the
parenthesized form:
```
( over <expr> [, <expr>...] [with <var>=<expr> [, ... <var>[=<expr>]] | <lateral> )
```

{{% tip "Note" %}}

The parentheses disambiguate a lateral expression from a [lateral pipeline operator](operators/over.md).

{{% /tip %}}

This form must always include a [lateral scope](#lateral-scope) as indicated by `<lateral>`.

The lateral expression is evaluated by evaluating each `<expr>` and feeding
the results as inputs to the `<lateral>` pipeline.  Each time the
lateral expression is evaluated, the lateral operators are run to completion,
e.g.,
```mdtest-spq
# spq
yield (
  over this | sum(this)
)
# input
[3,2,1]
[4,1,7]
[1,2,3]
# expected output
6
12
6
```

This structure generalizes to any more complicated expression context,
e.g., we can embed multiple lateral expressions inside of a record literal
and use the spread operator to tighten up the output:
```mdtest-spq
# spq
{...(over this | sort this | sorted:=collect(this)),
 ...(over this | sum:=sum(this))}
# input
[3,2,1]
[4,1,7]
[1,2,3]
# expected output
{sorted:[1,2,3],sum:6}
{sorted:[1,4,7],sum:12}
{sorted:[1,2,3],sum:6}
```

Because Zed expressions evaluate to a single result, if multiple values remain
at the conclusion of the lateral pipeline, they are automatically wrapped in
an array, e.g.,
```mdtest-spq
# spq
yield {s:(over x | yield this+1)}
# input
{x:1}
{x:[2]}
{x:[3,4]}
# expected output
{s:2}
{s:3}
{s:[4,5]}
```

To handle such dynamic input data, you can ensure your downstream pipeline
always receives consistently packaged values by explicitly wrapping the result
of the lateral scope, e.g.,
```mdtest-spq
# spq
yield {s:(over x | yield this+1 | collect(this))}
# input
{x:1}
{x:[2]}
{x:[3,4]}
# expected output
{s:[2]}
{s:[3]}
{s:[4,5]}
```

Similarly, a primitive value may be consistently produced by concluding the
lateral scope with an operator such as [`head`](operators/head.md) or
[`tail`](operators/tail.md), or by applying certain [aggregate functions](aggregates/_index.md)
such as done with [`sum`](aggregates/sum.md) above.

Commit message:

Rename yield op to values (#5986)

docs/language/lateral-subqueries.md, after:

---
weight: 7
title: Lateral Subqueries
---

Lateral subqueries provide a powerful means to apply a Zed query
to each subsequence of values generated from an outer sequence of values.
The inner query may be _any_ pipeline operator sequence (excluding
[`from` operators](operators/from.md)) and may refer to values from
the outer sequence.

{{% tip "Note" %}}

This pattern rhymes with the SQL pattern of a "lateral
join", which runs a subquery for each row of the outer query's results.

{{% /tip %}}

Lateral subqueries are created using the scoped form of the
[`over` operator](operators/over.md). They may be nested to arbitrary depth
and accesses to variables in parent lateral query bodies follows lexical
scoping.

For example,
```mdtest-spq
# spq
over a with name=s into (
  values {name,elem:this}
)
# input
{s:"foo",a:[1,2]}
{s:"bar",a:[3]}
# expected output
{name:"foo",elem:1}
{name:"foo",elem:2}
{name:"bar",elem:3}
```

Here the [lateral scope](#lateral-scope), described below, creates a subquery
```
values {name,elem:this}
```
for each subsequence of values derived from each outer input value.
In the example above, there are two input values:
```
{s:"foo",a:[1,2]}
{s:"bar",a:[3]}
```
which imply two subqueries derived from the `over` operator traversing `a`.
The first subquery thus operates on the input values `1, 2` with the variable
`name` set to "foo" assigning `1` and then `2` to `this`, thereby emitting
```
{name:"foo",elem:1}
{name:"foo",elem:2}
```
and the second subquery operates on the input value `3` with the variable
`name` set to "bar", emitting
```
{name:"bar",elem:3}
```

You can also import a parent-scope field reference into the inner scope by
simply referring to its name without assignment, e.g.,
```mdtest-spq
# spq
over a with s into (
  values {s,elem:this}
)
# input
{s:"foo",a:[1,2]}
{s:"bar",a:[3]}
# expected output
{s:"foo",elem:1}
{s:"foo",elem:2}
{s:"bar",elem:3}
```

## Lateral Scope

A lateral scope has the form `=> ( <query> )` and currently appears
only the context of an [`over` operator](operators/over.md),
as illustrated above, and has the form:
```
over ... with <elem> [, <elem> ...] into ( <query> )
```
where `<elem>` has either an assignment form
```
<var>=<expr>
```
or a field reference form
```
<field>
```
For each input value to the outer scope, the assignment form creates a binding
between each `<expr>` evaluated in the outer scope and each `<var>`, which
represents a new symbol in the inner scope of the `<query>`.
In the field reference form, a single identifier `<field>` refers to a field
in the parent scope and makes that field's value available in the lateral scope
via the same name.

Note that any such variable definitions override [implied field references](pipeline-model.md#implied-field-references) of
`this`. If a both a field named `x` and a variable named `x` need be
referenced in the lateral scope, the field reference should be qualified as
`this.x` while the variable is referenced simply as `x`.

The `<query>` is evaluated once per outer value
on the sequence generated by the `over` expression.  In the lateral scope,
the value `this` refers to the inner sequence generated from the `over` expressions.
This query runs to completion for each inner sequence and emits
each subquery result as each inner sequence traversal completes.

This structure is powerful because _any_ pipeline operator sequence (excluding
[`from` operators](operators/from.md)) can appear in the body of
the lateral scope.  In contrast to the [`values`](operators/values.md) example above, a [`sort`](operators/sort.md) could be
applied to each subsequence in the subquery, where `sort`
reads all values of the subsequence, sorts them, emits them, then
repeats the process for the next subsequence.  For example,
```mdtest-spq
# spq
over this into (
  sort this | collect(this)
)
# input
[3,2,1]
[4,1,7]
[1,2,3]
# expected output
[1,2,3]
[1,4,7]
[1,2,3]
```

## Lateral Expressions

Lateral subqueries can also appear in expression context using the
parenthesized form:
```
( over <expr> [, <expr>...] [with <var>=<expr> [, ... <var>[=<expr>]] | <lateral> )
```

{{% tip "Note" %}}

The parentheses disambiguate a lateral expression from a [lateral pipeline operator](operators/over.md).

{{% /tip %}}

This form must always include a [lateral scope](#lateral-scope) as indicated by `<lateral>`.

The lateral expression is evaluated by evaluating each `<expr>` and feeding
the results as inputs to the `<lateral>` pipeline.  Each time the
lateral expression is evaluated, the lateral operators are run to completion,
e.g.,
```mdtest-spq
# spq
values (
  over this | sum(this)
)
# input
[3,2,1]
[4,1,7]
[1,2,3]
# expected output
6
12
6
```

This structure generalizes to any more complicated expression context,
e.g., we can embed multiple lateral expressions inside of a record literal
and use the spread operator to tighten up the output:
```mdtest-spq
# spq
{...(over this | sort this | sorted:=collect(this)),
 ...(over this | sum:=sum(this))}
# input
[3,2,1]
[4,1,7]
[1,2,3]
# expected output
{sorted:[1,2,3],sum:6}
{sorted:[1,4,7],sum:12}
{sorted:[1,2,3],sum:6}
```

Because Zed expressions evaluate to a single result, if multiple values remain
at the conclusion of the lateral pipeline, they are automatically wrapped in
an array, e.g.,
```mdtest-spq
# spq
values {s:(over x | values this+1)}
# input
{x:1}
{x:[2]}
{x:[3,4]}
# expected output
{s:2}
{s:3}
{s:[4,5]}
```

To handle such dynamic input data, you can ensure your downstream pipeline
always receives consistently packaged values by explicitly wrapping the result
of the lateral scope, e.g.,
```mdtest-spq
# spq
values {s:(over x | values this+1 | collect(this))}
# input
{x:1}
{x:[2]}
{x:[3,4]}
# expected output
{s:[2]}
{s:[3]}
{s:[4,5]}
```

Similarly, a primitive value may be consistently produced by concluding the
lateral scope with an operator such as [`head`](operators/head.md) or
[`tail`](operators/tail.md), or by applying certain [aggregate functions](aggregates/_index.md)
such as done with [`sum`](aggregates/sum.md) above.
