docs/language/functions/grep.md, before:

### Function

&emsp; **grep** &mdash; search strings inside of values

### Synopsis

```
grep(<pattern> [, e: any]) -> bool
```

### Description

The _grep_ function searches all of the strings in its input value `e`
(or `this` if `e` is not given)
 using the `<pattern>` argument, which can be a
[regular expression](../search-expressions.md#regular-expressions),
[glob pattern](../search-expressions.md#globs), or string.
If the pattern matches for any string, then the result is `true`.  Otherwise, it is `false`.

{{% tip "Note" %}}

String matches are case insensitive while regular expression
and glob matches are case sensitive.  In a forthcoming release, case sensitivity
will be a expressible for all three pattern types.

{{% /tip %}}

The entire input value is traversed:
* for records, each field name is traversed and each field value is traversed or descended
if a complex type,
* for arrays and sets, each element is traversed or descended if a complex type, and
* for maps, each key and value is traversed or descended if a complex type.

### Examples

_Reach into nested records_
```mdtest-spq
# spq
grep("baz")
# input
{foo:10}
{bar:{s:"baz"}}
# expected output
{bar:{s:"baz"}}
```

_It only matches string fields_
```mdtest-spq
# spq
grep("10")
# input
{foo:10}
{bar:{s:"baz"}}
# expected output
```

_Match a field name_
```mdtest-spq
# spq
grep("foo")
# input
{foo:10}
{bar:{s:"baz"}}
# expected output
{foo:10}
```

_Regular expression_
```mdtest-spq
# spq
grep(/foo|baz/)
# input
{foo:10}
{bar:{s:"baz"}}
# expected output
{foo:10}
{bar:{s:"baz"}}
```

_Glob with a second argument_
```mdtest-spq
# spq
grep(b*, s)
# input
{s:"bar"}
{s:"foo"}
{s:"baz"}
{t:"baz"}
# expected output
{s:"bar"}
{s:"baz"}
```

Commit message:

simplify regexp/grep syntax (#6115)
This commit cleans up the regexp/grep syntax by isolating the
regexp pattern and glob syntax to search expressions and using
conventional strings for the functions regexp(), regexp_replace(),
and grep().  This allowed us to remove a bunch of special case
syntax for these functions from the PEG grammar.

This change means that globbing is no longer available for grep,
which now uses only regular expressions.  If we want to allow
globbing, we can enable that with a function that converts glob
strings to regexps or perhaps introduce a g"glob" style string.

We also removed the implied "this" argument from grep and now
require two arguments.

Detailed docs updates are forthcoming in the book branch.

docs/language/functions/grep.md, after:

### Function

&emsp; **grep** &mdash; search strings inside of values

### Synopsis

```
grep(<pattern>, e: any) -> bool
```

### Description

The _grep_ function searches all of the strings in its input value `e`
(or `this` if `e` is not given)
 using the `<pattern>` argument, which can be a
[regular expression](../search-expressions.md#regular-expressions),
[glob pattern](../search-expressions.md#globs), or string.
If the pattern matches for any string, then the result is `true`.  Otherwise, it is `false`.

{{% tip "Note" %}}

String matches are case insensitive while regular expression
and glob matches are case sensitive.  In a forthcoming release, case sensitivity
will be a expressible for all three pattern types.

{{% /tip %}}

The entire input value is traversed:
* for records, each field name is traversed and each field value is traversed or descended
if a complex type,
* for arrays and sets, each element is traversed or descended if a complex type, and
* for maps, each key and value is traversed or descended if a complex type.

### Examples

_Reach into nested records_
```mdtest-spq
# spq
grep("baz", this)
# input
{foo:10}
{bar:{s:"baz"}}
# expected output
{bar:{s:"baz"}}
```

_It only matches string fields_
```mdtest-spq
# spq
grep("10", this)
# input
{foo:10}
{bar:{s:"baz"}}
# expected output
```

_Match a field name_
```mdtest-spq
# spq
grep("foo", this)
# input
{foo:10}
{bar:{s:"baz"}}
# expected output
{foo:10}
```

_Regular expression_
```mdtest-spq
# spq
grep('foo|baz', this)
# input
{foo:10}
{bar:{s:"baz"}}
# expected output
{foo:10}
{bar:{s:"baz"}}
```

_Glob with a second argument_
```mdtest-spq
# spq
grep('^b.*', s)
# input
{s:"bar"}
{s:"foo"}
{s:"baz"}
{t:"baz"}
# expected output
{s:"bar"}
{s:"baz"}
```
