book/src/super-sql/operators/aggregate.md, before:

### Operator

[🎲](../intro.md#data-order)&emsp; **aggregate** &mdash; execute aggregate functions with optional grouping expressions

### Synopsis

```
[aggregate] <agg> [, <agg> ... ] [ by <grouping> [, <grouping> ... ] ]
[aggregate] by <grouping> [, <grouping> ... ]
```
where `<agg>` references an [aggregate function](../aggregates/intro.md)
optionally structured as a  [field assignment](intro.md#field-assignment)
having the form:
```
[ <field> := ] <agg-func> ( [ all | distinct ] <expr> ) [ where <pred> ]
```
and `<grouping>` is a grouping expression [field assignment](intro.md#field-assignment)
having the form:
```
[ <field> := ] <expr>
```

### Description

The `aggregate` operator applies
[aggregate functions](../aggregates/intro.md) to
partitioned groups of its input values to reduce each group to one output value
where the result of each aggregate function appears as a field of the result.

Each group corresponds to the unique values of the `<grouping>` expressions.
When there are no `<grouping>` expressions, the aggregate functions are applied
to the entire input optionally filtered by `<pred>`.

In the first form, the `aggregate` operator consumes all of its input,
applies one or more aggregate functions `<agg>` to each input value
optionally filtered by a `where` clause and/or organized with the grouping
expressions specified after the `by` keyword, and at the end of input produces one
or more aggregations for each unique set of grouping key values.

In the second form, `aggregate` consumes all of its input, then outputs each
unique combination of values of the grouping expressions specified after the `by`
keyword without applying any aggregate functions.

The `aggregate` keyword is optional since it can be used as a
[shortcut](intro.md#shortcuts).

Each aggregate function `<agg-func>` may be optionally followed by a `where` clause,
which applies a Boolean expression `<pred>` that indicates, for each input value,
whether to include it in the values operated upon by the aggregate function.
`where` clauses are analogous
to the [`where`](where.md) operator but apply their filter to the input
argument stream to the aggregate function.

The output values are records formed from the
[field assignments](intro.md#field-assignment)
first from the grouping expressions then from the aggregate functions
in left-to-right order.

When the result of `aggregate` is a single value (e.g., a single aggregate
function without grouping expressions or a single grouping expression without aggregates)
and there is no field name specified, then
the output is that single value rather than a single-field record
containing that value.

If the cardinality of grouping expressions causes the memory footprint to exceed
a limit, then each aggregate's partial results are spilled to temporary storage
and the results merged into final results using an external merge sort.

>[!NOTE]
> Spilling is not yet implemented for the vectorized runtime.

### Examples

---

_Average the input sequence_
```mdtest-spq
# spq
aggregate avg(this)
# input
1
2
3
4
# expected output
2.5
```

---

_To format the output of a single-valued aggregation into a record, simply specify
an explicit field for the output_
```mdtest-spq
# spq
aggregate mean:=avg(this)
# input
1
2
3
4
# expected output
{mean:2.5}
```

---

_When multiple aggregate functions are specified, even without explicit field names,
a record result is generated with field names implied by the functions_
```mdtest-spq
# spq
aggregate avg(this),sum(this),count()
# input
1
2
3
4
# expected output
{avg:2.5,sum:10,count:4::uint64}
```

---

_Sum the input sequence, leaving out the `aggregate` keyword_
```mdtest-spq
# spq
sum(this)
# input
1
2
3
4
# expected output
10
```

---

_Create integer sets by key and sort the output to get a deterministic order_
```mdtest-spq
# spq
set:=union(v) by key:=k | sort
# input
{k:"foo",v:1}
{k:"bar",v:2}
{k:"foo",v:3}
{k:"baz",v:4}
# expected output
{key:"bar",set:|[2]|}
{key:"baz",set:|[4]|}
{key:"foo",set:|[1,3]|}
```

---

_Use a `where` clause_
```mdtest-spq
# spq
set:=union(v) where v > 1 by key:=k | sort
# input
{k:"foo",v:1}
{k:"bar",v:2}
{k:"foo",v:3}
{k:"baz",v:4}
# expected output
{key:"bar",set:|[2]|}
{key:"baz",set:|[4]|}
{key:"foo",set:|[3]|}
```

---

_Use a separate `where` clause on each aggregate function_
```mdtest-spq
# spq
set:=union(v) where v > 1,
array:=collect(v) where k=="foo"
  by key:=k
| sort
# input
{k:"foo",v:1}
{k:"bar",v:2}
{k:"foo",v:3}
{k:"baz",v:4}
# expected output
{key:"bar",set:|[2]|,array:null}
{key:"baz",set:|[4]|,array:null}
{key:"foo",set:|[3]|,array:[1,3]}
```

---

_Results are included for `by` groupings that generate null results when `where`
clauses are used inside `aggregate`_
```mdtest-spq
# spq
sum(v) where k=="bar" by key:=k | sort
# input
{k:"foo",v:1}
{k:"bar",v:2}
{k:"foo",v:3}
{k:"baz",v:4}
# expected output
{key:"bar",sum:2}
{key:"baz",sum:null}
{key:"foo",sum:null}
```

---

_To avoid null results for `by` groupings as just shown, filter before `aggregate`_
```mdtest-spq
# spq
k=="bar" | sum(v) by key:=k | sort
# input
{k:"foo",v:1}
{k:"bar",v:2}
{k:"foo",v:3}
{k:"baz",v:4}
# expected output
{key:"bar",sum:2}
```

---

_Output just the unique key values_
```mdtest-spq
# spq
by k | sort
# input
{k:"foo",v:1}
{k:"bar",v:2}
{k:"foo",v:3}
{k:"baz",v:4}
# expected output
"bar"
"baz"
"foo"
```

Commit message:

change "where" clause of agg functions to "filter" (#6465)
This commit changes the "where <expr>" clause on agg functions
to use the SQL syntax "filter ( <expr> )".

While we were here, we changed ast.Agg to ast.AggFuncExpr, removed
the Where field from ast.CallExpr, and cleaned up the grammar
for how agg functions are integrated into expressions and shortcuts.

We also fixed a big where "count(*) where ..." did not previously
parse, but "count(*) filter ( ... )" now works.

book/src/super-sql/operators/aggregate.md, after:

### Operator

[🎲](../intro.md#data-order)&emsp; **aggregate** &mdash; execute aggregate functions with optional grouping expressions

### Synopsis

```
[aggregate] <agg> [, <agg> ... ] [ by <grouping> [, <grouping> ... ] ]
[aggregate] by <grouping> [, <grouping> ... ]
```
where `<agg>` references an [aggregate function](../aggregates/intro.md)
optionally structured as a  [field assignment](intro.md#field-assignment)
having the form:
```
[ <field> := ] <agg-func> ( [ all | distinct ] <expr> ) [ filter ( <pred> ) ]
```
and `<grouping>` is a grouping expression [field assignment](intro.md#field-assignment)
having the form:
```
[ <field> := ] <expr>
```

### Description

The `aggregate` operator applies
[aggregate functions](../aggregates/intro.md) to
partitioned groups of its input values to reduce each group to one output value
where the result of each aggregate function appears as a field of the result.

Each group corresponds to the unique values of the `<grouping>` expressions.
When there are no `<grouping>` expressions, the aggregate functions are applied
to the entire input optionally filtered by `<pred>`.

In the first form, the `aggregate` operator consumes all of its input,
applies one or more aggregate functions `<agg>` to each input value
optionally filtered by a `filter` clause and/or organized with the grouping
expressions specified after the `by` keyword, and at the end of input produces one
or more aggregations for each unique set of grouping key values.

In the second form, `aggregate` consumes all of its input, then outputs each
unique combination of values of the grouping expressions specified after the `by`
keyword without applying any aggregate functions.

The `aggregate` keyword is optional since it can be used as a
[shortcut](intro.md#shortcuts).

Each aggregate function `<agg-func>` may be optionally followed by a `filter` clause,
which applies a Boolean expression `<pred>` that indicates, for each input value,
whether to include it in the values operated upon by the aggregate function.
`filter` clauses are analogous
to the [`where`](where.md) operator but apply their filter to the input
argument stream to the aggregate function.

The output values are records formed from the
[field assignments](intro.md#field-assignment)
first from the grouping expressions then from the aggregate functions
in left-to-right order.

When the result of `aggregate` is a single value (e.g., a single aggregate
function without grouping expressions or a single grouping expression without aggregates)
and there is no field name specified, then
the output is that single value rather than a single-field record
containing that value.

If the cardinality of grouping expressions causes the memory footprint to exceed
a limit, then each aggregate's partial results are spilled to temporary storage
and the results merged into final results using an external merge sort.

>[!NOTE]
> Spilling is not yet implemented for the vectorized runtime.

### Examples

---

_Average the input sequence_
```mdtest-spq
# spq
aggregate avg(this)
# input
1
2
3
4
# expected output
2.5
```

---

_To format the output of a single-valued aggregation into a record, simply specify
an explicit field for the output_
```mdtest-spq
# spq
aggregate mean:=avg(this)
# input
1
2
3
4
# expected output
{mean:2.5}
```

---

_When multiple aggregate functions are specified, even without explicit field names,
a record result is generated with field names implied by the functions_
```mdtest-spq
# spq
aggregate avg(this),sum(this),count()
# input
1
2
3
4
# expected output
{avg:2.5,sum:10,count:4::uint64}
```

---

_Sum the input sequence, leaving out the `aggregate` keyword_
```mdtest-spq
# spq
sum(this)
# input
1
2
3
4
# expected output
10
```

---

_Create integer sets by key and sort the output to get a deterministic order_
```mdtest-spq
# spq
set:=union(v) by key:=k | sort
# input
{k:"foo",v:1}
{k:"bar",v:2}
{k:"foo",v:3}
{k:"baz",v:4}
# expected output
{key:"bar",set:|[2]|}
{key:"baz",set:|[4]|}
{key:"foo",set:|[1,3]|}
```

---

_Use a `filter` clause_
```mdtest-spq
# spq
set:=union(v) filter (v > 1) by key:=k | sort
# input
{k:"foo",v:1}
{k:"bar",v:2}
{k:"foo",v:3}
{k:"baz",v:4}
# expected output
{key:"bar",set:|[2]|}
{key:"baz",set:|[4]|}
{key:"foo",set:|[3]|}
```

---

_Use a separate `filter` clause on each aggregate function_
```mdtest-spq
# spq
set:=union(v) filter (v > 1),
array:=collect(v) filter (k=="foo")
  by key:=k
| sort
# input
{k:"foo",v:1}
{k:"bar",v:2}
{k:"foo",v:3}
{k:"baz",v:4}
# expected output
{key:"bar",set:|[2]|,array:null}
{key:"baz",set:|[4]|,array:null}
{key:"foo",set:|[3]|,array:[1,3]}
```

---

_Results are included for `by` groupings that generate null results when `filter`
clauses are used inside `aggregate`_
```mdtest-spq
# spq
sum(v) filter (k=="bar") by key:=k | sort
# input
{k:"foo",v:1}
{k:"bar",v:2}
{k:"foo",v:3}
{k:"baz",v:4}
# expected output
{key:"bar",sum:2}
{key:"baz",sum:null}
{key:"foo",sum:null}
```

---

_To avoid null results for `by` groupings as just shown, filter before `aggregate`_
```mdtest-spq
# spq
k=="bar" | sum(v) by key:=k | sort
# input
{k:"foo",v:1}
{k:"bar",v:2}
{k:"foo",v:3}
{k:"baz",v:4}
# expected output
{key:"bar",sum:2}
```

---

_Output just the unique key values_
```mdtest-spq
# spq
by k | sort
# input
{k:"foo",v:1}
{k:"bar",v:2}
{k:"foo",v:3}
{k:"baz",v:4}
# expected output
"bar"
"baz"
"foo"
```
