book/src/super-sql/operators/join.md, before:

### Operator

[🎲](../intro.md#data-order)&emsp; **join** &mdash; combine data from two inputs using a join predicate

### Synopsis

```
<left-input>
| [anti|inner|left|right] join (
  <right-input>
) [as { <left-name>,<right-name> }] [on <predicate> | using ( <field> )]

( <left-input> )
( <right-input> )
| [anti|inner|left|right] join [as { <left-name>,<right-name> }] [on <predicate> | using ( <field> )]

<left-input> cross join ( <right-input> ) [as { <left-name>,<right-name> }]

( <left-input> )
( <right-input> )
| cross join [as { <left-name>,<right-name> }]
```

### Description

The `join` operator combines values from two inputs according to the Boolean-valued
`<predicate>` into two-field records, one field for each side of the join.

Logically, a cross product of all values is formed by taking each
value `L` from `<left-input>` and forming records with all of the values `R` from
the `<right-input>` of the form `{<left-name>:L,<right-name>:R}`.  The result
of the join is the set of all such records that satisfy `<predicate>`.

A _using clause_ may be specified instead of an _on clause_ and
is equivalent to an equi-join predicate of the form:
```
<left-name>.<field> = <right-name>.<field>
```
`<field>` must be an _l-value_, i.e., an expression composed of dot operators and
index operators.

If the _as clause_ is omitted, then `<left-name>` defaults to "left" and
`<right-name>` defaults to "right".

For a _cross join_, neither an _on clause_ or a _using clause_ may be present
and the condition is presumed true for all values so that the
entire cross product is produced.

The output order of the joined values is undefined.

The available join types are:
* _inner_ - as described above
* _left_ - the inner join plus a set of single-field records of the form
`{<left-name>:L}` for each value `L` in `<left-input>` absent from the inner join
* _right_ - the inner join plus a set of single-field records of the form
`{<right-name>:R}` for each value `R` in `<right-input>` absent from the inner join
* _anti_ - the set of records of the form `{<left-name>:L}` for which there is no value
`R` in `<right-input>` where the combined record `{<left-name>:L,<right-name>:R}`
satisfies `<predicate>`
* _cross_ - the entire cross product is computed

As compared to SQL relational scoping, which utilizes table aliases and column aliases
within nested scopes, the pipeline join operator uses
[pipe scoping](../intro.md#pipe-scoping) to join data.
Here, all data is combined into joined records that can be operated upon
like any other record without complex scoping logic.

If relational scoping is desired, a SQL [`JOIN`](../sql/join.md) clause
can be used instead.

### Examples

---

_Join some numbers_
```mdtest-spq
# spq
join (values 1,3) on left=right | sort
# input
1
2
3
# expected output
{left:1,right:1}
{left:3,right:3}
```

---

_Join some records with scalar keys_
```mdtest-spq
# spq
join (
    values "foo","baz"
  ) as {recs,key} on key=recs.key
| values recs.value
| sort
# input
{key:"foo",value:1}
{key:"bar",value:2}
{key:"baz",value:3}
# expected output
1
3
```

---
_Join some records via a `using` clause_
```mdtest-spq
# spq
join (
  values {num:1,word:'one'},{num:2,word:'two'}
) using (num)
| {word:right.word, parity:left.parity}
# input
{num:1, parity:"odd"}
{num:2, parity:"even"}
# expected output
{word:"one",parity:"odd"}
{word:"two",parity:"even"}
```

---

_Anti-join some numbers_
```mdtest-spq
# spq
anti join (values 1,3) on left=right | sort
# input
1
2
3
# expected output
{left:2}
```

---

_Cross-product join_
```mdtest-spq
# spq
cross join (values 4,5) as {a,b} | sort
# input
1
2
3
# expected output
{a:1,b:4}
{a:1,b:5}
{a:2,b:4}
{a:2,b:5}
{a:3,b:4}
{a:3,b:5}
```

Commit message:

new approach to relational scoping (#6487)
This commit makes a big change to how relational scoping is implemented
better aligning the design with SQL semantics.  In this approach,
SQL operators always produce tables even if the input is not tabular.

Lateral column alias resolution is now performed statically and semantically
defined as substitution of input-scoped expressions corresponding
to the column alias.  To ensure that scope bindings do not depend on
input data, we chose to prioritize lateral column binding over input
table binding thus deviating from Postgres semantics in favor of
Google SQL semantics.

The select-* pattern no longer works with dynamic inputs and instead
matches all columns in the input schema.  Also, table.* pattern matching
now works.  We also fixed join with the USING clause to limit the USING
expressions to non-dotted identifiers and to deduplicate the USING columns
and place them in the leftmost column position.

Table and column scope bindings are now case insensitive so that
"select A" works on column "a" and "select t.a" works on table "T", etc.

Redundant agg functions are now detected and computed only once.  Also,
expressions to ORDER BY can correctly reach into the SELECT scope and
refer to aggregate functions, grouping expressions, input table columns,
and so forth.

We've updated the pipe join docs here to reflect the change to USING but
more complete doc updates for relational will be added in a subsequent PR.

book/src/super-sql/operators/join.md, after:

### Operator

[🎲](../intro.md#data-order)&emsp; **join** &mdash; combine data from two inputs using a join predicate

### Synopsis

```
<left-input>
| [anti|inner|left|right] join (
  <right-input>
) [as { <left-name>,<right-name> }] [on <predicate> | using ( <field> [, <field> ...]) ]

( <left-input> )
( <right-input> )
| [anti|inner|left|right] join [as { <left-name>,<right-name> }] [on <predicate> | using ( <field> [, <field> ...])]

<left-input> cross join ( <right-input> ) [as { <left-name>,<right-name> }]

( <left-input> )
( <right-input> )
| cross join [as { <left-name>,<right-name> }]
```

### Description

The `join` operator combines values from two inputs according to the Boolean-valued
`<predicate>` into two-field records, one field for each side of the join.

Logically, a cross product of all values is formed by taking each
value `L` from `<left-input>` and forming records with all of the values `R` from
the `<right-input>` of the form `{<left-name>:L,<right-name>:R}`.  The result
of the join is the set of all such records that satisfy `<predicate>`.

A _using clause_ `using (f1, f2, ...)` may be specified instead of
an _on clause_ and is equivalent to an equi-join predicate of the form:
```
<left-name>.<f1> = <right-name>.<f1>
and
<left-name>.<f2> = <right-name>.<f2>
and
...
```
where each field reference must be an identifier.  If dotted paths are
desired instead of singe-identifier fields, the _on clause_ should be
used instead.

If the _as clause_ is omitted, then `<left-name>` defaults to "left" and
`<right-name>` defaults to "right".

For a _cross join_, neither an _on clause_ or a _using clause_ may be present
and the condition is presumed true for all values so that the
entire cross product is produced.

The output order of the joined values is undefined.

The available join types are:
* _inner_ - as described above
* _left_ - the inner join plus a set of single-field records of the form
`{<left-name>:L}` for each value `L` in `<left-input>` absent from the inner join
* _right_ - the inner join plus a set of single-field records of the form
`{<right-name>:R}` for each value `R` in `<right-input>` absent from the inner join
* _anti_ - the set of records of the form `{<left-name>:L}` for which there is no value
`R` in `<right-input>` where the combined record `{<left-name>:L,<right-name>:R}`
satisfies `<predicate>`
* _cross_ - the entire cross product is computed

As compared to SQL relational scoping, which utilizes table aliases and column aliases
within nested scopes, the pipeline join operator uses
[pipe scoping](../intro.md#pipe-scoping) to join data.
Here, all data is combined into joined records that can be operated upon
like any other record without complex scoping logic.

If relational scoping is desired, a SQL [`JOIN`](../sql/join.md) clause
can be used instead.

### Examples

---

_Join some numbers_
```mdtest-spq
# spq
join (values 1,3) on left=right | sort
# input
1
2
3
# expected output
{left:1,right:1}
{left:3,right:3}
```

---

_Join some records with scalar keys_
```mdtest-spq
# spq
join (
    values "foo","baz"
  ) as {recs,key} on key=recs.key
| values recs.value
| sort
# input
{key:"foo",value:1}
{key:"bar",value:2}
{key:"baz",value:3}
# expected output
1
3
```

---
_Join some records via a `using` clause_
```mdtest-spq
# spq
join (
  values {num:1,word:'one'},{num:2,word:'two'}
) using (num)
| {word:right.word, parity:left.parity}
# input
{num:1, parity:"odd"}
{num:2, parity:"even"}
# expected output
{word:"one",parity:"odd"}
{word:"two",parity:"even"}
```

---

_Anti-join some numbers_
```mdtest-spq
# spq
anti join (values 1,3) on left=right | sort
# input
1
2
3
# expected output
{left:2}
```

---

_Cross-product join_
```mdtest-spq
# spq
cross join (values 4,5) as {a,b} | sort
# input
1
2
3
# expected output
{a:1,b:4}
{a:1,b:5}
{a:2,b:4}
{a:2,b:5}
{a:3,b:4}
{a:3,b:5}
```
